# clustering_dimensionality_reduction
This code accompanies the paper with the title:

**Scanning X-ray fluorescence data analysis for the identification of paintings’ materials, techniques, and state of preservation**

**Abstract**
X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectrometry has proven to be a core, non-destructive, analytical technique in cultural heritage studies mainly because of its non-invasive character and ability to rapidly reveal the elemental composition of the analyzed artifacts. Moreover, X-rays penetrate deeper into matter than the visible light, allowing thus further analysis that may eventually lead to the extraction of information that pertains to the substrate(s) of an artifact. Scanning macro X-ray allows for the extraction of elemental distribution images. The present work aimed to compare two different analysis methods for interpreting the large number of XRF spectra, collected by scanning X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy. The measured spectra were analyzed in two ways: a fully spectroscopic approach, and a dimensional reduction approach. The potentialities of the applied methods are showcased on a notable 18th-century Greek religious panel painting.  The fully spectroscopic approach analyses separately each one of the measured spectra and leads to the construction of single-element spatial distributions (element maps).  The dimensional reduction approach, accomplished using t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding analysis (t-SNE) and principal component analysis (PCA), leads to the reduction of thousands of XRF spectra in an easily perceived dataset of clusters. The two analytical approaches allow extracting detailed information about the used pigments, pigments layers and mixing, painting techniques, and restoration interventions.

